Case study is a widely used but poorly understood research method, conducted differently in different disciplines. This paper explores philosophical, theoretical and methodological issues in case study research and outlines how to conduct one. It offers preliminary guidance for policy makers on how to select and use case studies for learning and decision making. In social science research, a case study is a detailed, contextualised account of a clearly delineated, real world phenomenon, prepared prospectively using mostly qualitative methods. Social science case studies can be of various kinds (eg, theoretical or naturalistic, single or multiple, typical or extreme). A public health case study is a historical account of a health threat and how it was managed. An implementation science case study evaluates the implementation of an intervention (usually retrospectively), combining quantitative assessment against predefined objectives with a narrative of how the project unfolded. Educational case studies present real world topics as stories illustrated by data and prompt students to discuss these from different angles. Impact case studies summarise the societal impact of a research programme. Many accounts described as case studies are overly brief and superficial. The paper concludes with a call to improve the quality and consistency (and hence the usefulness) of case studies.

---

Whatever their specific genre, case studies are usually presented in narrative (story) form, describing how something emerged and how its fortunes—for better or worse—unfolded over time. The hallmark of a genuine case study is detail: the authors commit to producing a full (warts-and-all) account of the case that juxtaposes multiple perspectives, including findings that resonate with the researcher's overall interpretation, and to disconfirming findings that challenge that interpretation. This attention to nuance has parallels to what qualitative researchers refer to as "thick description." Rich detail distinguishes the research case study, based on the collection, analysis, and synthesis of empirical data, from the briefer and more narrowly biomedical clinical case report. This article discusses the research case study, not the clinical case report.

---

Case studies, whether published in the academic or grey (ie, non-academic) literature, need to be approached with circumspection. Their provenance and purpose depend on who wrote them and why. They vary considerably in length, depth, and quality, although length and detail do not necessarily reflect rigor. The case study is an inherently unstructured form and does not lend itself to standardisation. Many true case studies are not titled or indexed as such and vice versa. Non-research case studies might be strong on description but contain limited data, a narrower range of data sources, and less explicit links between data and conclusions.

---

Key scholars of case studies in social science researchRobert Yin (disciplinary background: cognitive and social science):Yin has been highly influential in healthcare case studies, perhaps because his philosophical position (sometimes described as post-positivist) has some parallels with the objectivist (positivist) assumptions of biomedical science. Post-positivism acknowledges that objectivity in social science might be difficult but holds that we should strive to get as close to objective reality as we can through rigorous study design, testing theory across multiple cases (small n), and using multiple sources of evidence. To this end, Yin offers various techniques to improve the validity and reliability of the research process. Yin focuses on objective measurement and comparisons and places less emphasis than some other case study researchers on the subjective perceptions of research participants. Yin is also sometimes described as a social realist (ie, assuming an objective social reality but recognising that we might be unable to fully know it).Kathleen Eisenhardt (organisational studies):Eisenhardt is also described as coming from a post-positivist or social realist perspective. She offers a detailed technique for building theory from multiple case studies (designed primarily for comparing how a theory fares across different organisational settings). She proposes a structured and systematic process, including analysis within and across cases, to identify patterns and develop testable propositions.Robert Stake (education and evaluation):Stake approaches case study research from a very different perspective that is rooted in constructivism, a philosophical position which assumes that reality is multiple and that individuals' experiences and interpretations shape their world. Stake teaches that each case is unique and should be studied primarily for its own sake, rather than to develop or test theory. Rather than rigid and standardised data collection across cases, Stake advocates for inquiry that is naturalistic, curiosity driven, and responsive (adapting to the evolving context of the case). He considers that research participants' experiences and their (perhaps conflicting) interpretations are crucial to constructing the case.Sharan Merriam (adult education):Merriam is also a constructivist, although her work also embraces a form of pragmatism (in the sense of seeking to orient case study research to producing findings that inform real world decisions, generate practical solutions and improve outcomes). Merriam emphasises the importance of rich description and of understanding how individuals construct meaning from their experiences. Like Stake, she recommends an inductive approach that is, allowing themes and patterns to emerge from data, unhampered by prior theory.Haridimos Tsoukas (organisational studies, philosophy of knowledge):Tsoukas approaches case study from a deeply philosophical perspective influenced by the later Wittgenstein (who de-emphasised universal laws and showed how it is possible to reason from the particular to the general). Tsoukas’ work has also been described as pragmatist and process oriented—that is, assuming that the world is dynamic and that knowledge is generated through human action. The key to case study analysis, suggests Tsoukas, is understanding how meaning is created in context (hence, researchers should engage with the particularities and complexities of a single case, paying close attention to the role of language, action and interpretation).Bent Flybvjerg (planning, especially of mega-projects):Flybvjerg is also broadly pragmatist in his approach to case study. He emphasises phronesis (practical wisdom—the context dependent knowledge that is acquired in, and informs, practice). He proposes that detailed, context-rich analysis of specific cases helps us understand complex phenomena, especially how people acquire and apply practical wisdom (or not). He emphasises the importance of studying how values, power, and context influence practical action and decision making.Ray Pawson (sociology):Pawson has been highly influential in health services research because of the popularity of his social (or scientific) realist philosophy underpinning realist evaluation. He considers that social programmes play out differently in different settings because different mechanisms are triggered. A mechanism is defined as how human actors draw on a programme's resources to achieve their goals. A realist case study, recommends Pawson, should seek to tease out the interaction between context, mechanism, and outcome.

---

Some cases are naturally well-bounded. A school, for example, is materially circumscribed, has a defined set of human actors (eg, pupils, staff, governors) and a history that began shortly before its founding day. But most cases are not so easy to delineate. A case study of a vaccination programme probably involves multiple organisations, numerous human actors of various kinds (including, perhaps, people protesting against the programme) and complex historical roots. The research team will need to make—and defend—a series of judgments about precisely what case they are examining. Even in cases that appear well-bounded, boundaries can be complex and shifting as organisations are restructured and people move into or out of roles. Hence, the question of "what is the case?" might be an issue of ongoing inquiry during the study rather than something firmly fixed at the outset. Another aspect of bounding the case is selection of an appropriate time frame including when the story begins and when it ends. These issues are matters of contextual judgment (some case studies unfold in weeks, others in decades).

---

The philosophical positions of some leading case study researchers are summarised in. While post-positivist case study researchers such as Yin and Eisenhardt aspire to meeting (or approaching) criteria such as disengagement (objectivity), minimisation of bias, precision, statistical significance, and reproducibility, constructivist case study researchers such as Merriam and Stake focus on criteria such as authenticity, engagement, nuance, reflexivity, verisimilitude (ie, does the story ring true?), and the extent to which all perspectives have been captured. Researchers working from pragmatist assumptions (eg, Flyvbjerg and Tsoukas) define quality in terms of the primacy of knowledge that arises from experience and is tied to action, and the ability of the case study to inform meaningful and ethical progress with a real world challenge.

---

As with other complex, real world tasks involving people in context (eg, raising a child), case study research cannot be done entirely by formula. Drawing partly on work by others, some methodological steps are listed below. Noting Cleland et al's warning against an overly linear approach to the complex interpretive task of building a case study, these steps should be seen as rules of thumb to be questioned, refined, and applied adaptively to circumstances. The case study used as a worked example in, on digital innovation in UK primary care, broadly followed these 10 steps (as described in a separate protocol paper).

---

Analyse each data source separately and appropriately (eg, thematic analysis for interviews and field notes, descriptive statistics for quantitative data), and then bring these data together to construct your overall interpretation. For example, waiting list data will tell you that waits are increasing; interviews with staff and analysis of resource allocation documents will help tell you why; interviews with patients will capture the impact on lived experience. If your philosophical position is post-positivist or realist, follow an established method for categorising, tabulating, and formally combining your different data sources with a view to testing theory (in this case, for example, extending our theoretical knowledge about how waiting list management works). If your philosophical position is constructivist or pragmatist, your analysis should be oriented to interpretation of the case for its own sake (ie, you will be interested primarily in this waiting list story and the implications for local actors). Accordingly, extend your preliminary summary iteratively using the hermeneutic cycle (ie, weaving in each new data source to refine a picture of the whole).

---

Some examples of the genre depict a lone public health hero whose actions helped resolve a disease crisis of which the cause was somewhat of a mystery (Tulchinsky's book, for example, includes chapters on James Lind and scurvy, John Snow and cholera, and Semmelweiss and hospital acquired infections). Some contemporary public health case studies also have an air of mystery solving—for example, Miller et al explored the cause of a fatal covid-19 outbreak at a community choir practice in early 2020. They used qualitative interviews along with data on case positivity and theoretical knowledge of how airborne particles travel in indoor spaces to provide early evidence of the likely airborne nature of the SARS-CoV-2 virus.

---

There is increasing concern that most current published research findings are false. The probability that a research claim is true may depend on study power and bias, the number of other studies on the same question, and, importantly, the ratio of true to no relationships among the relationships probed in each scientific field. In this framework, a research finding is less likely to be true when the studies conducted in a field are smaller; when effect sizes are smaller; when there is a greater number and lesser preselection of tested relationships; where there is greater flexibility in designs, definitions, outcomes, and analytical modes; when there is greater financial and other interest and prejudice; and when more teams are involved in a scientific field in chase of statistical significance. Simulations show that for most study designs and settings, it is more likely for a research claim to be false than true. Moreover, for many current scientific fields, claimed research findings may often be simply accurate measures of the prevailing bias. In this essay, I discuss the implications of these problems for the conduct and interpretation of research.

---

Several methodologists have pointed out that the high rate of nonreplication (lack of confirmation) of research discoveries is a consequence of the convenient, yet ill-founded strategy of claiming conclusive research findings solely on the basis of a single study assessed by formal statistical significance, typically for a p-value less than 0.05. Research is not most appropriately represented and summarized by p-values, but, unfortunately, there is a widespread notion that medical research articles should be interpreted based only on p-values. Research findings are defined here as any relationship reaching formal statistical significance, e.g., effective interventions, informative predictors, risk factors, or associations. “Negative” research is also very useful. “Negative” is actually a misnomer, and the misinterpretation is widespread. However, here we will target relationships that investigators claim exist, rather than null findings.

---

As has been shown previously, the probability that a research finding is indeed true depends on the prior probability of it being true (before doing the study), the statistical power of the study, and the level of statistical significance. Consider a 2 × 2 table in which research findings are compared against the gold standard of true relationships in a scientific field. In a research field both true and false hypotheses can be made about the presence of relationships. Let R be the ratio of the number of “true relationships” to “no relationships” among those tested in the field. R is characteristic of the field and can vary a lot depending on whether the field targets highly likely relationships or searches for only one or a few true relationships among thousands and millions of hypotheses that may be postulated. Let us also consider, for computational simplicity, circumscribed fields where either there is only one true relationship (among many that can be hypothesized) or the power is similar to find any of the several existing true relationships. The pre-study probability of a relationship being true is R/(R + 1). The probability of a study finding a true relationship reflects the power 1 - β (one minus the Type II error rate). The probability of claiming a relationship when none truly exists reflects the Type I error rate, α. Assuming that c relationships are being probed in the field, the expected values of the 2 × 2 table are given in. After a research finding has been claimed based on achieving formal statistical significance, the post-study probability that it is true is the positive predictive value, PPV. The PPV is also the complementary probability of what Wacholder et al. have called the false positive report probability. According to the 2 × 2 table, one gets PPV = (1 - β)R/(R - βR + α). A research finding is thus more likely true than false if (1 - β)R > α. Since usually the vast majority of investigators depend on a = 0.05, this means that a research finding is more likely true than false if (1 - β)R > 0.05.

---

First, let us define bias as the combination of various design, data, analysis, and presentation factors that tend to produce research findings when they should not be produced. Let u be the proportion of probed analyses that would not have been “research findings,” but nevertheless end up presented and reported as such, because of bias. Bias should not be confused with chance variability that causes some findings to be false by chance even though the study design, data, analysis, and presentation are perfect. Bias can entail manipulation in the analysis or reporting of findings. Selective or distorted reporting is a typical form of such bias. We may assume that u does not depend on whether a true relationship exists or not. This is not an unreasonable assumption, since typically it is impossible to know which relationships are indeed true. In the presence of bias (), one gets PPV = ([1 - β]R + uβR)/(R + α − βR + u − uα + uβR), and PPV decreases with increasing u, unless 1 − β ≤ α, i.e., 1 − β ≤ 0.05 for most situations. Thus, with increasing bias, the chances that a research finding is true diminish considerably. This is shown for different levels of power and for different pre-study odds in. Conversely, true research findings may occasionally be annulled because of reverse bias. For example, with large measurement errors relationships are lost in noise, or investigators use data inefficiently or fail to notice statistically significant relationships, or there may be conflicts of interest that tend to “bury” significant findings. There is no good large-scale empirical evidence on how frequently such reverse bias may occur across diverse research fields. However, it is probably fair to say that reverse bias is not as common. Moreover measurement errors and inefficient use of data are probably becoming less frequent problems, since measurement error has decreased with technological advances in the molecular era and investigators are becoming increasingly sophisticated about their data. Regardless, reverse bias may be modeled in the same way as bias above. Also reverse bias should not be confused with chance variability that may lead to missing a true relationship because of chance.

---

Several independent teams may be addressing the same sets of research questions. As research efforts are globalized, it is practically the rule that several research teams, often dozens of them, may probe the same or similar questions. Unfortunately, in some areas, the prevailing mentality until now has been to focus on isolated discoveries by single teams and interpret research experiments in isolation. An increasing number of questions have at least one study claiming a research finding, and this receives unilateral attention. The probability that at least one study, among several done on the same question, claims a statistically significant research finding is easy to estimate. For n independent studies of equal power, the 2 × 2 table is shown in: PPV = R(1 − βn)/(R + 1 − [1 − α]n − Rβn) (not considering bias). With increasing number of independent studies, PPV tends to decrease, unless 1 - β < a, i.e., typically 1 − β < 0.05. This is shown for different levels of power and for different pre-study odds in. For n studies of different power, the term βn is replaced by the product of the terms βi for i = 1 to n, but inferences are similar.

---

Box 1. An Example: Science at Low Pre-Study OddsLet us assume that a team of investigators performs a whole genome association study to test whether any of 100,000 gene polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to schizophrenia. Based on what we know about the extent of heritability of the disease, it is reasonable to expect that probably around ten gene polymorphisms among those tested would be truly associated with schizophrenia, with relatively similar odds ratios around 1.3 for the ten or so polymorphisms and with a fairly similar power to identify any of them. Then R = 10/100,000 = 10−4, and the pre-study probability for any polymorphism to be associated with schizophrenia is also R/(R + 1) = 10−4. Let us also suppose that the study has 60% power to find an association with an odds ratio of 1.3 at α = 0.05. Then it can be estimated that if a statistically significant association is found with the p-value barely crossing the 0.05 threshold, the post-study probability that this is true increases about 12-fold compared with the pre-study probability, but it is still only 12 × 10−4.Now let us suppose that the investigators manipulate their design, analyses, and reporting so as to make more relationships cross the p = 0.05 threshold even though this would not have been crossed with a perfectly adhered to design and analysis and with perfect comprehensive reporting of the results, strictly according to the original study plan. Such manipulation could be done, for example, with serendipitous inclusion or exclusion of certain patients or controls, post hoc subgroup analyses, investigation of genetic contrasts that were not originally specified, changes in the disease or control definitions, and various combinations of selective or distorted reporting of the results. Commercially available “data mining” packages actually are proud of their ability to yield statistically significant results through data dredging. In the presence of bias with u = 0.10, the post-study probability that a research finding is true is only 4.4 × 10−4. Furthermore, even in the absence of any bias, when ten independent research teams perform similar experiments around the world, if one of them finds a formally statistically significant association, the probability that the research finding is true is only 1.5 × 10−4, hardly any higher than the probability we had before any of this extensive research was undertaken!

---

Corollary 2: The smaller the effect sizes in a scientific field, the less likely the research findings are to be true. Power is also related to the effect size. Thus research findings are more likely true in scientific fields with large effects, such as the impact of smoking on cancer or cardiovascular disease (relative risks 3–20), than in scientific fields where postulated effects are small, such as genetic risk factors for multigenetic diseases (relative risks 1.1–1.5). Modern epidemiology is increasingly obliged to target smaller effect sizes. Consequently, the proportion of true research findings is expected to decrease. In the same line of thinking, if the true effect sizes are very small in a scientific field, this field is likely to be plagued by almost ubiquitous false positive claims. For example, if the majority of true genetic or nutritional determinants of complex diseases confer relative risks less than 1.05, genetic or nutritional epidemiology would be largely utopian endeavors.

---

Corollary 3: The greater the number and the lesser the selection of tested relationships in a scientific field, the less likely the research findings are to be true. As shown above, the post-study probability that a finding is true (PPV) depends a lot on the pre-study odds (R). Thus, research findings are more likely true in confirmatory designs, such as large phase III randomized controlled trials, or meta-analyses thereof, than in hypothesis-generating experiments. Fields considered highly informative and creative given the wealth of the assembled and tested information, such as microarrays and other high-throughput discovery-oriented research, should have extremely low PPV.

---

Our descriptive study examined current associations (2022–2024) between US state-level health outcomes and 4 US state-level political metrics: 2 rarely used in public health research (political ideology of elected representatives based on voting records; trifectas, where 1 party controls the executive and legislative branches) and 2 more commonly used (state policies enacted; voter political lean). The 8 health outcomes spanned the life course: infant mortality, premature mortality (death at age <65), health insurance (adults aged 35–64), vaccination for children and persons aged ≥65 (flu; COVID-19 booster), maternity care deserts, and food insecurity. For the first 3 outcomes, we also examined trends in associations (2012–2024). For all political metrics, higher state-level political conservatism was associated with worse health outcomes, especially for the metrics for political ideology and state trifectas. For example, in 2016, the premature mortality rate in states with Republican vs Democratic trifectas was higher by 55.4 deaths per 100 000 person-years (95% CI: 7.7, 103.1), and the slope of the rate of increase to 2021 was also higher, by 27.0 deaths per 100 000 person-years (95% CI: 24.4, 29.7). These results suggest elections, political ideology, and concentrations of political power matter for population health.

---

Elections are crucial to democratic governance, with results shaping political priorities, policies, programs, resources, and—often underappreciated—population health. At issue is who is elected, with what political agendas, both individually and as tied to political party affiliations and governing coalitions. Such statements might seem to be truisms, but US population health research engaged with issues of governance and health has primarily focused on policies proposed or enacted—and also more recently, voter political lean (as spurred by the impact of political polarization on responses to and the harms of the COVID-19 pandemic)—and not on who enacts the policies and their power to do so., Consequently, limited US empirical evidence documents links between political ideologies, political power, and population patterns of health and health inequities.,

---

Our a priori hypothesis is that more conservative political ideologies—that is, politics that prioritize the private sector and cultural traditionalism over government programs, policies, and regulations that prioritize social equity and collective goods,,—are associated both with poorer current public health outcomes and worse trends in population health improvements over time. Numerous pathways are postulated to link political ideologies to population health outcomes and health inequities, variously involving the power of the state to shape living, working, and economic conditions and the rights needed to attain equity in these conditions; access to and quality of health care; and protection of the biophysical resources and environs necessary to thrive., Also crucial is who holds what power to implement the specified political ideology, as shaped by laws affecting who can vote, voter turnout and voter suppression, demarcation of political district boundaries (including gerrymandering), political donations, and who is declared to be an election winner.,, A lack of public health research addressing political ideology and concentrations of political power is thus worrisome.

---

Our observational cross-sectional state-level analysis accordingly seeks to expand knowledge about the social patterning of population health in relation to a range of political metrics, taking advantage of heterogeneities in state political profiles and health status across US states and over time, spanning 4 US presidential elections (2012–2024) during a time of increasing political polarization.,, With regard to exposures, we include not only the 2 more commonly used measures employed in public health research pertaining to state policies and voter political lean,, but also 2 measures commonly used in political science and political sociology research but rarely used in public health studies, regarding elected representatives’ political ideology (based on their voting records) and the concentration of party political power via state trifectas (ie, 1 party controls both the executive and legislative branches of government).,, We consider the associations of these political metrics with 8 health outcomes, chosen because they (1) span the life course, (2) are important public health indicators, and (3) are quickly temporally responsive to changes in societal conditions (ie, have a short etiologic period).,,,, In, we summarize the theoretical rationale for each study variable. By considering the patterns of relationships observed, we aimed to generate both questions and information about relationships between political ideology, power, and population health that can be useful to health and policy researchers, health professionals, policymakers, elected officials, civil society groups, and the broader electorate.

---

We used data on the first dimension of the DW-Nominate scale, which measures political ideology based on roll-call votes (especially regarding the economy and government regulation) of every member of US Congress, using data spanning from the 112th through the 118th Congress. Given the variable number of US House representatives by US state (current median: 6; average: 8.7; range: 1–52) and also 2 US senators per state, we generated annual state-level measures of DW-Nominate political polarization, based on tercile cut points for the full study period (2012–2024), using the Index of Concentration at the Extremes (ICE). We scored the ICE to range from −1 (most conservative) to 1 (most liberal).

---

For the trend analyses (2012–2024), we first plotted the annual data for each health outcome stratified by states grouped by level of political conservatism (). Next, we conducted joinpoint analyses, using these same state groupings, to identify key inflection points in the temporal trends (). We then fit spline regression models, which used state-level random effects to account for possible unobserved heterogeneity between states and also adjusted for poverty, to (1) test for the significance of these joinpoints, (2) estimate the slope between the identified joinpoints, and (3) estimate the absolute difference in health outcomes, comparing the bottom and middle categories to the top category for each political metric, for each presidential election year.

---

Current values for the state-level political metrics, health outcomes, and poverty metrics are mapped in, which displays the geographic patterning of these measures. In these maps, higher values are shown in darker colors, adverse health outcomes are shown in grayscale (for which a higher value is a worse outcome), and beneficial health outcomes use a purple scale (for which a higher value is a better outcome). Detailed data on the distribution of these variables are provided in for both the current period (2022–2024) and over time (2012–2024). Similar patterns of state heterogeneity are evident for all of these variables in each time period (, ).

---

Considering first the outcomes for which higher values indicate worse health (infant mortality, premature mortality, percentage uninsured, maternity care desert, and food insecurity), states with lower political conservatism had lower values (ie, better health outcomes) than states with higher political conservatism, as indicated by the negative estimates shown in. The largest standardized regression estimates were observed for the political ideology and the state trifecta metrics, as follows—(1) infant mortality: Democratic vs Republican trifecta (−0.94 infant deaths per 1000 live births; 95% CI: −1.57, −0.30); (2) premature mortality: US House DW-Nominate ICE score (−8.87 deaths per 100 000 person-years; 95% CI: −17.53, −0.20); (3) percentage uninsured: Democratic vs Republican trifecta (−2.76%; 95% CI: −4.90%, −0.61%); (4) maternity care desert: Democratic vs Republican trifecta (−6.21%; 95% CI: −9.31%, −3.11%); and (5) household food insecurity: US Senate DW-Nominate ICE score (−0.56%; 95% CI: −0.90%, −0.21%). In supplemental analyses for infant and premature mortality, the same patterns held for the White non-Hispanic population; however, among the Black non-Hispanic and Hispanic populations, the associations were not significant (with wide 95% CIs indicating low precision of estimates due to smaller population size; see ).